[Music]
first stop on our discovery of
underground architecture takes us to the
Aegean Sea and to the Greek island of
Antipas love Greece love it
I've been coming to Greece for 40 years
and I think it's about my favorite place
in the world I think it's the color of
the water the color of the sky and still
it's so unspoiled a little white
squirrel still you to imagine that good
of history big nothing breaking the
skyline there's a rule here that you
know he builds so far in one direction
before you've got to turn or break it
down that's explains that yeah
these historically would have been
fisherman's houses and you know probably
a bit of subsistence farming we're
heading to a spacious underground
holiday home where the owners wanted a
contemporary house big enough to
entertain their family and friends
the challenge facing the architects was
to design a house with stunning sea
views from each of its nine bedrooms but
at the same time discreetly concealed
the building I mean we're going to go
and see rather bizarrely an underground
house here yeah which I think's a really
odd choice given that this is something
it's beautiful landscape I've ever seen
view is a two-way responsibility and
actually if you build on that to look at
the view you also have to accept that
you are making something that people
will look at conceivably that's why
they've taken this underground option
yeah so that I need something like 80 or
90 percent of this house is on the
ground yeah sounds hideous to me because
I'm slightly claustrophobic and I can't
bear the thought of being underground
but I think this house is actually
designed as a piece of land so yeah
rather than a building you don't think
it's gonna be dark and dingy and down
big you rip I did I hope it isn't and it
would be a real change
yeah helping us locate this coastal
hideaway is theö
who looks after the owners home for them
whilst they're back in the UK welcome to
Ambur oh thank you very much chef honest
all funny style
we're gonna go over to that healing and
down again I'm assuming we're not gonna
get a great big vision of the house
because we know that it's eighty or
ninety percent under the ground so will
we see it at all before we get there
you'll see it's a bit of a surprise
really where we going wow what a spot
[Music]
oh what a beautiful place it's beautiful
by hiding the majority of this structure
beneath them landscape the architects
managed to create a huge house on this
side which both embraces the view and
retains the natural charm of this
location now the owners are not here but
they're very happy for you to have a
look around thank you so much thank you
so really very kind of generator down
I'll see you later thank you very very
much so Caroline tell me now looking at
this are you still worried about feeling
claustrophobic down there no yet oh yeah
I know I get my mind I'm not making up
my mind yet but look it's
extraordinarily beautiful
this concealed home sits on a generous 6
acre plot a nine thousand cubic meters
of Earth was excavated from the site
creating a giant crater a concrete
foundation and rear and internal walls
were then built in this void 10 meters
deep the building unfolds on two levels
to allow space for multiple bedrooms
bathrooms and terraces with private sea
views concrete shafts rise up from the
rear of the building to allow
ventilation and natural light enter the
underground spaces
to fit in with the local architecture
Katinas traditional white walls change
direction after every 10 meters the
green roof is covered in indigenous
plants allowing the underground living
spaces to be invisible with only the
pool terrace and whitewashed walls on
view these walls that really enticing
than they are you with Heights oh not as
good as you you should come up it's
great look oh oh okay
Carolina's all these lovely little
terraces and courtyards within here and
that's a such a private space as well as
it be another one there yeah another
little private space god that's clever
isn't it real sense of intimacy isn't
there
you could be naked reading your book all
afternoon there's a thought
[Music]
this is such a lovely enticing space
look at this I don't know whether I'm
inside or outside I thought this was
just a canopy of bamboo covering this
face but actually there's glass up there
so you can sit here even when it's
raining I mean look at these walls and
the shapes and the shadow and the shade
so beautiful and looking back through
there Caroline so the scene yeah
[Music]
this is the dream me this is absolutely
the dream it's a kind of sort of a
lesson in house out of Italy ler in a
hot country what I've Meier about the
building is that it's a very clever bit
of architecture it's very thorough and
really well integrated with this place
and that's why I warm to it so much by
hiding this modern whitewashed house in
the landscape
it not only retains the islands
architectural heritage it also benefits
from traditional methods of keeping
living spaces cool underground I really
wanna have a nosy upstairs just work out
how it all fits together I really want
to have a beak about in here I'll catch
you later okay this feels obviously like
a really contemporary house but at the
same time it has the choruses of
something that's really ancient because
people have been building in hot
countries like this for hundreds and
hundreds of years what they've been
doing is building in a way that
harnesses the qualities the ground and
under the ground is a stable temperature
so all of the living rooms in this house
are under the ground what happens then
is that that lovely cool Seabreeze is
used to draw air through those rooms and
then out of those shafts there's light
shafts that are behind and those shalt
also bring light to the back of the
rooms that would also be dark unlike a
normal house we can have light coming in
from both sides an underground house
can't do that you need to bring in light
this is actually a deepest underground
that this house gets and looked really
light I think for many years as
architects you forgot how to do
buildings there really spoke of their
place but this building shows that you
could harness ancient technologies and
still do a building that is totally
contemporary I'm loving this I'm loving
this
over here all it is it's a little bit of
light coming down but it's it's painted
orange so it just shines out neon and up
there all I can see is the bright bright
blue of the sky against the orange so
beautiful
[Music]
Oh all my misgivings about an
underground house being gloomy and dark
and dank have completely disappeared
because this is light and bright and
cool really really hot out there and
it's just perfect temperature in here
it's got a lovely ensuite hi Caroline
gonna turn the shower off yes
I'm you might take your clothes off
first but the view from here is so Greek
it couldn't be more Greek it's white
walls and then there's a blue but the
blue domes made out of sky this is like
some ancient Greek hilltop town isn't it
where the buildings are really close
together and all you get is that
fantastic view of the sky through the
white walls it's wonderful it's so kind
of refreshing down here as well you
don't feel like you're baking in the hot
Sun because actually this is really a
device to bring the air through and get
the light here
[Music]
the owners of this underground holiday
home live in the UK with their two
children
Karima is in London so I'm giving her a
call to find out what drew her family to
this island did you fall in love with it
straight away straight away straight
away love at first sight really my
husband and I I think we're just about
to be married and we looked out at the
sunset and that was it we said we need
to see the sunset to the day we die
of course that's adorable but in
purchasing the land
the couple had also bought into plans
for a proposed building for the site
which had already been designed by
Portuguese architects Kamla rabello and
Susana Martin's so you designed this for
somebody that hadn't bought it I mean
this was a speculative house for
something abstract problem yes it was
like a bridge it had a void below the
the structure and you could see through
was a beautiful plan but it wasn't a
plan that suited us as a family
it was quite thin and quite narrow and
we live in a tall thin house in London
and we were very keen to have something
with a bit more space more light and air
they wanted a bigger house a big double
double yeah and these started to change
everything
we spent a year working on those plans
we kept changing them but it just it
didn't it didn't work with the
dimensions in the scope that we wanted
it was frustrating was it ever stressful
a stress demanding let's put it like
that because it was a lot of back and
forwards in the end architects and sort
of I threw up my hands and said you know
what it just isn't working
you had to abandon one idea and how did
that feel for you at the beginning we
were not very happy but it's always
difficult to abandon an idea and how
long did it take you to get to a scheme
that was recognizably this a minute
really can you show me the first sketch
yes Ted in that first sketches are often
the purest form of an idea we started
with - broke
mine's also very basic thoughts like for
example the Greek amphitheaters so
panoramic places for you to enjoy the
view what's interesting this though is
that it's absolutely the opposite of the
previously which is a bridge hovering
above a piece of landscape whereas this
is a piece of landscape it allows you to
conceal a very big building very subtly
but it looks now like a very finished
building the landscape is all grown back
but actually there must have been huge
disturbance to make this building huge
disturbance to the landscape beginning I
was very scared when they started disc
evasions very scared
it's a massive angry quarry and it's
huge destruction there is always a
moment when you feel fear yeah and
that's the moment when you see this
immense crater you say nature is never
to come back the same way but then but
then it's our rule we are architects
architecture means to construct to build
there's no visible structure here but
tell me how was it constructed these
walls are three layered bricks
traditional way to this operation Cobra
which turn wreak havoc it's about
seventeen seventeen oh and this is very
good for for atomic reasons this is the
way they begin degree very thick walls
yes deep reveals with windows pushes
frightened when the drawings came to
life and the structure was built their
angles I could not have imagined I knew
the footprint of the building and the
drawings backs front but when you looked
at certain angles just it was beyond it
was beyond what we we had hoped project
standing back now several years later do
you love this building I love this
building yes
[Music]
this is what Kareem I fell in love with
but she and her husband or this plot of
land and looking at it now they haven't
made a mistake half a know I mean this
is for me what Greece is about this time
of the evening but facing this getting
the sunset over water I defy anybody to
look at this view and not think they
found paradise could you sell up and
come here I think I could but you'd have
to build me a house deal
this view is something that would make
me leave my Southwest leafy patch at
home this was Hollywood I'd be snogging
in
you